Okay,
today is June 9th, 1981. This is our second
interview with General Kidwell. And last time we
finished, well, we just basically covered the end
of the war. We talked about General Clark a little
bit. We got to May 1945. And you were in Austria. And
there are a couple of questions I want to ask. All
right. When you were with the conference between
the United States, Soviet Union, Britain, and
France, attempting to exactly what were you
attempting to do? I guess I should start. What were
we attempting to do? Yeah, you said that you were
trying to set up the utilities. You were the chief
public works and utility officer. Right. Our job
or our responsibility was to to reestablish
electric energy in Austria. Austria is a country
that lives with electric power, both
hydroelectric and coal-fired steam generation.
And
none of the occupying forces or conquering forces
knew what they had. They just knew to turn the
lights on and switch on and nothing happened. And
of course in combat, wires get shot down, power
stations get bombed,
railroad lines get bombed, and power lines
inherently follow railroad lines because it's
the most easily constructed area. And so The
governing powers, meaning the quadripartite
level of General Mark Clark for the American
representative and an English general, a French
general, and a Russian general, set about going to
govern these occupied, and relatively speaking,
Russia Each nation had about a fourth of it. Russia
got the biggest fourth, but
our job is, we were appointed, I was appointed as
the public utility officer representing the
American forces. It was a English brigadier,
French brigadier, and a Russian major general
that was masquerading as a major. Why, I don't
know. That's how curious. Well, it was their
method of subterfuge. He was an artilleryman, and
that gave me the entree to breaking him down and
knowing a whole lot about him. And he was a British
soldier. What was his name? Correct Cole. Correct
Cole. How do you spell that? I pronounce it
K-R-E-C-K-O, but that may not be the
pronunciation. I mean the spelling, but that's
the way you pronounce it correctly.
The American Army got the identification and
intelligence on him through some of my endeavors,
and that set him on the trail of proving out who he
was and why he was masquerading as a major. I'll
never know, but that is it. What kind of person was
he? He was a very likable person. He always had his,
I call it, his political commissar with him. He
would never make a statement without huddling
with his fellow. I forget his name, but he was a
civilian. But he was a politician, or the
communist representative versus the military
representative. And they were inseparable. They
went hand in glove, and both of them would yak at the
interpreter. And an interpreter would, I guess,
blend what they were saying and come in and tell me
what it was or tell the group what it was. Why do you
say he was likable? He was likable. He was
pleasant. If it was a cat and mouse or a poker game
with him, he never knew anything. And of course, I
tried to inform myself on what I wanted to know
before I ever got there. And he would lie to you just
looking you right in the face. He caught hands down
with his hand in the cookie jar, but he didn't swear
at it. No, he was sitting over here reading the
Bible or something. He was a funny fellow, but he
was likable. I mean, he was pleasant to talk with.
And as an artilleryman, we had a lot to talk about.
Their philosophy on artillery is very different
from ours. I explained yesterday where they fire
area fire versus pinpoint fire that the American
Army They don't have the capabilities. They
didn't at that time, let's say it that way.
Our job, we had a meeting and discussed what we were
going to do and how we were going to do it. And most
people all looked to the American Army to be the
leader. Even the Russians? The Russians, the
French, and the English. Purely and simply
because they were over there as conquerors and to
take whatever they could get. where the American
army was over there to restore peace and to set the
economy back up and get it working and then turn the
government back to the Austrians. Of course, it
had been controlled by the Nazis and the American
approach was to turn it over back to the Austrians.
So, we decided that before we could, tell our
superiors anything about the the condition of the
power plants and the power line and all we had
inventory of them. Yeah. Weren't there any
Austrians around to help? Any Austrians? Well
this is the point I'm leading up to. The Russians
and the American, I mean the English and the French
look to the American Army to do this. Set the power
plants up, get our soldiers in there, our
technicians, and our equipment, and get the thing
running so they could turn the light on and
something would happen. Even in the Russian zone?
In the Russian zone, yes.
They wanted our help. They were only interested
in, for instance, the Russians were interested in
dismantling the plants and hauling them back to
Russia. And I'll tell you a story about that later.
I'll get into the details of the thing. The English
were interested in setting Tito up down in
Yugoslavia. And they wanted to take all the Jews'
power, excess power that they had in their area,
transmit it to Yugoslavia to set them up. Mm-hmm.
And the French, they were just a bunch of leeches,
meaning they were interested in pillaging and
taking back to France, because the Germans had
done them that way, and as far as they were
concerned, the Austrians were Germans. Yeah. So,
our first... What about the British? Well, the
British were interested in hauling and taking,
transmitting their power, excess power, or some
of their power, and getting the excess from the
American area, and piping it down to Yugoslavia to
set Tito up. The British? The British, yes. I
thought you said the Russians wanted to set Tito
up. No, no, the British. The Russians want to haul
the stuff back to Russia. Oh, okay, okay, okay. I
was a little confused there. The British were
interested in setting Tito up down in Yugoslavia
for some reason or another. Mr. Churchill was very
pro-Tito in Yugoslavia. He was trying to set that
nation up and That was the directive and of course
that's our approach to it. So the first thing we had
to do was find out what power plants were in
operation. And of course I was able to secure a list
of the power plants in Vienna through captured
documents and through normal relations with the
power industry there, which was centralized in
Vienna. So we took out and it fell on my shoulders to
furnish the transportation and the food and all
this kind of business because we were able to and I
did it to get my job done rather than say, well, I'll
take you in the American zone and then there's no
telling what'll happen in the Russian zone or the
French zone or the Miami zone, the English zone. So
I furnished transportation and the fuel and the
driver and we made a tour of all the power plants in
all of Australia and inventorying them. I said the
other three nations were interested in the
Americans doing the restoration and I took the
attitude that it wasn't an American job that we
were certainly going to do in our sector, no
question about that. if we had to, but the approach
that I took was that we should get the Austrians who
worked in that power plant, who were
superintendents of that power plant, to do the
restoration. He knew what power lines were down
and what weren't. He knew which switch to pull to
energize one south or one east or one west, and
certainly we didn't. It would have taken us years
to get in there and actually rebuild the thing as
far as we were concerned. So I went to General
Saltman, who was my superior, and told him what I'd
realized and my approach to it, and of course he
checked it out with General Clark as a directive,
and that's what we decided to do. That we would...
get the Austrians to restore their plant. Get the
Austrians to restring the lines. And if need be, we
could furnish the wire. Yeah, we could give them
the supplies. We could give them the supplies if
need be. But first, we were going to make them, with
their own capabilities, do it. How did Austrians
respond to this idea? Yes, they very much liked it
because that meant to us we put them back on the
payroll and got them to helping themselves. And
that was our big job is to get them to helping
themselves to restore their own industry. So we
took a tour of all Austria and that was really a
fantastic experience because it's the most
gorgeous country in the world. and a lot of good
Austrians. They were all eager to get about their
chores when I laid it out to them with the
concurrence of these other people and they got
about doing it. You had no problems under the
Austrians? No problems. They were very
cooperative. Sometimes we had to furnish them
with with diesel fuel to run their trucks, for
instance. And that was a small price to pay.
Sometimes we furnished them with some wire for a
critical lap or loop or something around some bad
areas or something like that. We'd furnish them
wire, and then they'd furnish the poles and the
manpower. It was the manpower that I was fighting
because I didn't want to take as much American
soldiers and rebuild a thing for them. As far as I
was concerned, the American soldiers had done his
job, and he was just over staying trained, and that
was our big chore of keeping him
at a high point of training so that if something
erupted, well, we were capable of going back to
combat. And you never knew. Were there fears that?
Well, there might be a pocket of German resistance
someplace. No, that was close. Or was Japan a
worry? Well, of course, VJ Day had already passed.
Right, OK. So frankly, the fear was of the
Russians. No question about it, in my mind. Did you
talk about this with your colleagues? I'm sorry?
Did you talk about this? Not in this group. All we
talked about was the weather and hunting and power
transmission and generations. But certainly I
got it through our G2 information on what our
preparations were for. But we were trying to
defensively think and yet Offensively, we go
about our job of restoring power. And all the time
in the back of your mind, you don't trust them. You
don't trust any of them. I didn't trust any of them.
Why is that? Because you dealt with them? Because I
dealt with them and learned that you couldn't
trust them. For instance, back in combat now, you
can talk about trusting them. And this is an
English colonel. We were up in repelling Germany.
It's not too far from Aachen. We'd had some
tremendous firefights. Some of the worst
fighting in the whole door-to-door fighting for
doughboys.
And I had my headquarters in a monastery at took us
in, and it was a dry place, a warm place, or at least
it wasn't cold, let's set it that way, it wasn't
warm, but it was probably 50, 55, something like
that in there, and they kept it livable, but
nothing else. And I was out on about my chores one
day, and I came back, and I saw an English Jeep right
in front of my gate. And I looked in there, and
here's a map board, you know what a map board is,
about a square with a map of the area on it, and he's
got his locations pointed around. And there's my
battalion area, and my battalion headquarters
marked on the map board, in an unguarded jeep. And
this colonel had taken his belt off with his pistol
and laid it on top of his map board, knocked on the
door, and our guards let him in, and he was in there
waiting for me to come have lunch. Obviously, he
just came by to say hello. But he timed it so he'd be
there at lunchtime, because they loved to come and
eat with us. We had good food, and they didn't. So
that's the answer there. But the point I'm making
is that you can't trust them, because if he handles
top secret data that way, and certainly that's top
secret to me and top secret to the American Army, my
exact coordinates on the thing, in combat, the
Germans may be five miles from there, four miles,
something like that. You don't trust them. You
can't trust them. So I carried that philosophy all
the way through until I got home. So the only ones
you trusted then were not the British or the
Russians, but only the Americans. Only the
Americans. An American tells you something,
well, that's gospel. But you couldn't trust the
other nationals.
He completely exposed my position. Sure. He laid
his gun on top of it and walked off and left it. Any
German kid could come along, picked up both of
them, and gone. And that's transmitted back
immediately to the German army. And then they blow
a kid with that asshole. And that's something that
you don't do. Do you think that the English then
were as distrustful as the Russians? Or do you
think there was a degree? Well, it's a degree and
it's maybe a different sense of distrust, but it
boiled down to where you don't trust them. I
wouldn't give them any confidential
information, any secret information. I just
wouldn't do it because I didn't know where it was
going. Do you think this is the general feeling
among the American officers? Well it was in my
area, let's just say it that way. Was there a
question of superiority or inferiority? I mean
did you think that you were a superior officer or
did you think your American troops were better
than English or could you comment on that? Well of
course I always had the attitude that the American
officer was far superior to any of the others.
Just down the line from second lieutenant all the
way up to the General Eisenhower, there's no
question in my mind about that. On the other hand,
up there they had their methods of handling this
intelligence business and out in field we had ours
and on down to my battalion. Now this is back when we
were still in combat, of course. But that fear of
The unknown is something that you don't get over
once you've been shot at.
Back in combat again, my people knocked down a
Messerschmitt that had been by. We saw him when he
went by us, and where he went I don't know, but 10 or
15 minutes away he came back by. and started
unloading his guns on us. We say clearing the
board, it's getting rid of his ammunition. And
they knocked him down. And our people got over to
him and first thing he do is cut his signals off here
which gives his rank and his organization and all
that stuff for intelligence. And they picked up
his clipboard, again his map board. And there's my
battalion's coordinates on there, and he had it
plotted on his boards. Now how he got it, I don't
know. But one of these old men that was left in this
little town, or some kid, got the word back through
their gate, Grapevine, and he knew exactly where
we were. Well, all this is indelibly impressed and
printed on your memory. Sure. And you can't take
that thing lightly. No, no. So he was probably
moving in for the kill? He was attempting to bomb
you then? Well, he had a bomb mission, and he went
and unloaded his bomb, but he came back and
unloaded his machine guns on us, and our people got
him. But that didn't eradicate my battalion
coordinates off his clipboard. Sure, yeah. So
what'd you do, move immediately? No, no. We were
cautious about the thing, but we moved in a day or
two. But you can't move immediately. You've just
got to be super cautious and get ready for them.
Because there are people close to you on the right,
close to you on the left, and you can't go
backwards. And you can't go forwards. So you're
hemmed in a goose egg that we operate in. We moved
gun positions, sure. maybe two, three hundred
yards, so they couldn't fire with their
long-range artillery or with these flea bombs.
But you can't move. I mean, to get out of country,
that's what I should say. So I just didn't trust any
of those people that we were working with, and I
think my fears were justifiable. You know, often
the British, I've read quite a bit about the
British military and they felt that they'd been in
the war for two years before we even got in the war
and that they had won battles before we joined the
war effort and that they were rather upset by the
fact that Americans now came in and were running
the crusade. Did you ever get some negative
feelings from British officers about this? The
answer is no. I think that's more of a historian's
fabrication than anything else. It didn't
reflect down in our area. Now the British had been
occupying countries for several hundred years.
And they knew how to occupy them. For instance, I
was the northmost, my battalion was the northmost
American outfit in the Ninth Army. and the second
British Army was right on our border, which means a
lot of times we'd get into their area and a lot of
times they'd get into our area and you can't help
it. But conflict like that, I mean conflict
meaning cross boundaries. One day we got word the
night before that we were gonna move out and we were
really relieved by a British artillery outfit.
which meant that Army or Corps or somebody had
swapped a boundary, you know, and they would come
in and take our area, and maybe we were going to move
south a little bit or something. I don't remember.
But this Lieutenant Colonel, battalion
commander, came in my headquarters about 9.30, 10
o'clock in the morning. He was British, no?
British. came in to take over the area. And I said,
hell, I ain't going nowhere. I'm happy right here.
Nothing happening, you know. All's quiet, and all
we're doing is firing a little harassment fire,
and no problems. We're not going anywhere. And he
said, oh, yeah, you're going here, and I'm
supposed to take over the area. And I said, oh,
shit. I'm not going anywhere. I don't know
anything about it. And we talked about some cities
that he and I had both been in, you know. We'd passed
over there, you know. Oh, it
was 11, 30, something like this time we got down to
getting ready for lunch, and I asked him if he'd
like to stay for lunch with us. And
he said he would. But he was anxious to get his
people, meaning his equipment and all, coming in
and taking over our area. And I said, I ain't going
nowhere. I don't have any orders to go anywhere.
Did you call back to headquarters then? Did I call
back to headquarters? Well, I knew I was going to
move, but I knew I wasn't going to move until about
4.30. I think it's 4.30 that afternoon. And I
wouldn't give him the satisfaction of letting him
know about it. Why not? Well, I didn't know. I was
still responsible for fire if the soldiers in
front of us had needed it, till 430. And I couldn't
be getting up and moving out and letting him go up.
Then my core artillery officer called for a
certain fire. And I said, hell, General, I can't
give it to you. I'm moving. This is, line me up if you
want me to move out early. I just wouldn't give him
any satisfaction at all, because I had that
responsibility.
He had lunch with us. And after lunch, I got up and
walked around. And of course, he could see our
people had the information to get ready to leave at
430. And he could see the preparations. He knew
something was cooking. But I would never admit it
to him. But walked out in his, by that time, he had
his. It's battalion commander's party there. Now
that battalion commander's party is his staff,
his wire section, and all that kind of business.
And there were two Studebaker trucks. I'd never
seen a Studebaker truck, a six by six, you know,
with a bow top and a canvas on it and all buttoned
down, battened down like it, they had something in
there really secret. And I admired them and I asked
him how they ran and where he got them and this kind
of business. And of course it's all a land lease
business. But I picked up the tarp and looked in
there and my God, completely full of Budweiser
canned beer. Two of them. I had never seen any
Budweiser canned beer in Europe. And that was his
ration, or he was responsible for issuing it, or
something. I never did find out what that was. But
there again, a light lit up in my brain. And
I got to thinking that I would somehow get some of
that beer. I got to negotiating in my own mind. And
about 3 o'clock in the afternoon,
He could see us starting to get our headquarters
ready to move out. There's no question about it, he
knew it. And I said, well, I just got word, of course
I got away from him and came back and I just got a
message that we were gonna move out. We got to start
picking up a wire and all. Our wire, we must have had
a
hundred miles of wire strung out. An artillery
outfit gets awfully strung out and that's quite a
chore. And he asked me twice, how about leaving
that wire intact so he wouldn't have to string it?
And I just told him, no way. Now, what kind of wire is
this? This is telephone wire. I see. So you can talk
to all the units. Well, I wouldn't talk to all the
units, theoretically in secret, rather than on
the radio. See, the radio exposes you to where you
are. Sure, the airway, sure. And it's wide open for
intelligence, where wire theoretically isn't.
They can tap wire just... by putting a clip on it,
and that's that. But we run it enough to know if it's
being done. I said, we run it, meaning have a walker
walk in the lines, keep them in service, and be sure
nobody's tampering with them. And I said, no way.
Of course, that gave me the idea of it was getting
old, and we had done a lot of maintenance on it,
meaning tying it, patching it, and this kind of
thing. And it was leaking, so that gave me the idea
of just battle losing the wire. And about 3.30, I
guess, I made a deal with this old boy that we'd
leave our wire intact
for enough beer to give every one of my people a can
of beer. And he didn't go for that very well. But
then again, he got to thinking about it. And that's
what we did. We traded that wire intact, in place.
for a can of beer for every one of my people, 400 and
some odd cans of beer. Well, those things happen.
The end of the story is... Well, why didn't you have
any Budweiser over there? I don't understand
that. I don't know, I don't know. Didn't you have
any American canned beer? They had American beer,
yes, but there again, I hadn't seen any Budweiser.
And
we rarely got it. because we were a Army battalion.
That thing comes in the Army, goes to Corps, down to
divisions. And see, we weren't a part of any
division. We were separate troops, an Army
battalion. And we just didn't get it. I mean, the
division's supposed to service us. We're taxed to
them for rations and supplies, meaning rations to
food and ammunition, gasoline, that kind of
business. But we take orders for firing from
somebody else. And that was one of the
deficient points of being a separate battalion.
You were kind of like a bastard at a family reunion.
They wanted you when they needed your fire, but
they didn't want to service your outfit. Anyway, I
introduced this English commander to, we had
lunch, and of course we used our field kitchens and
all. It was
what you would expect in combat. It wasn't a mess
line for the officer's mess, but it was, we used
plates and knives and forks, but we didn't have
tablecloths, we didn't have napkins, we were in
the field. But this, I introduced this... Did you
have hot food done? Oh, you bet. For the men and for
the officers? Oh, you bet. Yes, sir. That's one
thing that I was adamant about. We didn't serve
food unless it was hot, and we took it to the men.
They didn't have to walk a half mile, a mile to get a
meal. We took it to the men. They drove it out on a
jeep? Drove it out on a jeep or in a command car,
whatever they had available, you know. Bet you
they liked that. Well, sure. Well, you had to take
care of them. But I introduced this British
colonel, this commander, to... the German that
owned this house we were in. And he talked to him in
German.
He could talk German. And he told him he wanted to
get the silver out on the table for supper. He
wanted tablecloths and napkins. He wanted the
rugs put back on the floor. He wanted the finest
china that they had and all. And they got it. I
kidded my executive officer about it after it was
all over and we went back there a day or two later
just out of curiosity and there's all the china and
everything on the table. I said something to my
executive officer about the English sure knew how
to occupy a country and he said well after all
Colonel they've been occupying countries for 300
years they ought to learn something. So that's the
difference in American forces and the English
forces.
We were transferred, we got cut off in the bulls
from the American army and we were transferred for
command purposes to the Second British Army under
General Montgomery. The next day, General
Montgomery came down there. He sent us a letter
welcoming us. I guess there were a half dozen units
doing this. But the next day, the old man came down
and shook my hand and said, glad to have you in his
army. You bet. What did you think of him? Well, he
was a tremendous personality. That's all I know
about him. We were in his outfit for maybe a week or
something like this before we were referred back
to the 9th Army. He came down and welcomed us. So
there's a different aspect of the English
officer. That was just a good public relation deal
on his part. It was good soldiering on his part. And
we, my battalion, and I'm sure my superiors
appreciated it, because I couldn't help but
report it to them. Did the Americans do that on your
guys? I mean, did an American general come when you
were assigned to a new area? Did they come in and
welcome you to their... No, basically you
reported to them. I see. And I always went and
reported to them. Sometimes generals would
welcome me and sometimes he'd be busy as hell. I'd
see him, I'd see his exec or the operation officer
or somebody and let them know we were there and
ready to go. He'd say, well, we're glad to have you
and we need you or something and that's it. What did
your men think of Montgomery coming down? A big
pardon? What did your men think? Oh, they were
thrilled about it. They appreciated it. They
rarely saw a senior officer. If they saw a general
once a month, he was just driving by. But they never
came and
made a talk to him. And General Montgomery made a
talk to my headquarters battery. And of course, he
was talking to the whole battalion. But my
headquarters barrier was right around my
headquarters, and I could get up 50, 60 people
without any trouble, you know. And he just came
down and said, hello, welcome, and we're glad to
have you, and anything you need, well, let me know
about it, and I'll get it for you. And that's it. And
do they do that? Do they get you supplies? Well,
yeah, they furnish the supplies, meaning
gasoline and food and That kind of stuff. Was there
a difference between the food that they supplied
versus the food that the 9th Army? Oh, it was
American food. It was all American C rations or K
rations. I don't mean K or D rations.
Basically, it was all American food. We were
supplying them. Sure. Lend-lease. Lend-lease.
Give them the food. That's so much of my experience
with General Montgomery. And by the same token,
I'll tell you a story of General Eisenhower. When
we were back in the Hocken area, Hocken was the
center of Charlemagne's domain. That was his
capital during his reign, and he had a summer
palace maybe 25 miles southeast of there at
Cornelie Munster. It was his summer palace and
beautiful place, square block with a cloister all
the way around it. It was a beautiful place, castle
type of thing. I had to go down and see the Army
artillery officer. We were in the 9th Army at that
time. About something, I don't remember what it
was. I got down to Cornelia Munster, oh I got within
a half mile of it. And the MP stopped me and says, You
can't go any further. And of course, I asked him,
why not? What the hell's happening here? I got
business down at the Army headquarters with an
Army artillery officer. He says, well, sir, if
you've got business down there, of course, he
checked my password and counter password and all
this kind of business. And he was able to verify
that I was current as far as security was
concerned. He said, well, if you've got to go down
there, you'll have to walk, because my orders are
no vehicles past this point. And I'm sorry, but
that's my orders. And about that time, the MP
sergeant came up and asked what the trouble was.
And I said, I just want to drive down. I've got to go
to the Army artillery officer's office. And
frankly, I don't know where it is. I've never been
there. He said, well, Colonel, you can go down
there, but you have to walk, because no vehicle is
going past this stop point. And of course, all I
could do is say, well, that's your orders. Thank
you very much, Sergeant. And how'd I get there? And
he showed me the roads to take and you could see the
castle over here. He showed me and he said, now you
go down to the far southeast corner and that's the
gate to use and you get in on it. And I'm sure I was
stopped a dozen times walking by different
sentinels. All of them checking the password and
the counter password and my business and who I was
and my identity and all. And that was all right. In
retrospect, I admired it, but then it was a chore
and a pain in the neck because it was hindering me,
and I was busy, and I had something else to do. So I'd
mess with those people, but anyway, I got there. I
started down the hall, and this group of gentlemen
came out of a conference room or a big room, and
General Eisenhower, General Montgomery, some
French general, all American men, four-star and
three-star generals. I'd never seen so many
general officers in my life. General Patton was
there, General Bradley was there, General
Simpson was there, General Hodges was there. Of
course, I recognized them. And as I approached
them, they were walking toward me and General
Montgomery and General Smith. It was Peter Smith,
his number one aide, helper. and gentlemen were
leading the pack coming up and of course I just
approached them and kept going until I got within
10 or 15 feet of them and I backed up against the wall
and took my helmet off and said good morning
gentlemen and General Eisenhower wheeled out of
the two and came over and said good morning and I
reported my name to him and what my battalion
number is And he said, I've heard good things about
that kid. Well, that's a fine battalion. You keep
up the good work, boy, and he had been stomached
like that, and that's all there was to it. Really?
Yeah, that's right. And like I say, I never saw the
number, the jillions of generals. A brigadier
general was just like peons at this conference.
What it was all about, I don't know to this day. I
didn't try to inquire about it because none of my
business. But that was the reason for all this
security. I've often thought what a lucrative
target that would have been to some German
airplane going by and just decided, well, I'll
unload my bombs and let them have it. Because the
whole
safe headquarters and brains was there. But
that's two stories about General Eisenhower in
Montgomery. Well, what did you think about
Eisenhower when he did that? Well, it blew me up ten
foot tall, and my damn shoulders went back, and my
stomach pulled in, and it was the thrill of my life.
I bet. It was the thrill of my life, and I couldn't
help but tell the artillery officer about it, and
he just lay and said, well, that's Ike or
something. You know, he just passed it off. Was
that Eisenhower was known for that? Well... He was
known as being a soldier's soldier. He'd stop and
talk to soldiers. And of course, he could see I was
in combat, and probably dirty and muddy and filthy
and all. I was adamant about two things, about my
people being clean shaven, and as long as I could
brush my teeth, well, I was in good shape. I could be
dirty, and my clothes filthy, and my boots muddy
and all, and I didn't pay attention to it. all day's
work, but I was clean shaven, had a decent haircut.
I certainly had a soldier's haircut. How was
Eisenhower's luck? Great, great. He was
energetic,
enthusiastic, and I'll never forget him hitting
me in the stomach like that. Keep up the good work,
boy. And, of course, I couldn't help but tell that
to my driver going back, and and the damn driver
told all the battering and all the battalion and
the story got out, I guess, holy to you. But that was
my experience with Jim Ladner. I admired him
tremendously. It didn't take him 15 seconds to do
it. But it indelibly impressed on me that he was a
great person.
I thought for one. Very thoughtful, very
thoughtful. He was down here on a momentous
mission and he made some decisions and he said you
do this, I'm sure. What he did was lay down the
battle order and we would get a follow-up. Or he
wouldn't have had all of his field generals in, I
mean the four-star generals, the army generals,
and he,
I guess all the way down to division. I was Oh, was he
in fatigues or was he in dress? Oh, no, no, no. He was
in his ODs with his jacket and all. And all of them
were. It was a dress performance for them. I never
saw him in fatigues. I never saw him but one time.
But he was a great person in my opinion.
In retrospect, I can understand of all the
security. Sure. Absolutely. Like you said, one
mile an hour. Paying the next start with, but I can
understand it. Anyway, I got out of there and did my
business, got what information I needed or got
whatever I went after. Probably needed some help
on some ammunition or something like that, you
know, and I couldn't get through normal channels.
You go visit those people, you can shake them loose
because they're always sitting on some extra.
It's a question of tapping the right source. You
learn to be pretty self-enterprising as a
separate unit commander because you've got to go
get everything you want. It's not automatic
coming down to you every day. And if you're not
enterprising, you just get left. I was wondering a
little bit about your schedule out in the field
during combat. Was there anything, of course your
men have to have some time off. They certainly get
tired. They get tired of combat too. They must have
to have some liberty sometime or have a few beers or
drinks or something just to encourage them if
there's something besides combat. How did that
work? Well, yes and no.
You don't operate in combat by watch. Oh, for sure.
Timing. Absolutely. Basically, you've got your
three meals a day. Breakfast is sun up and lunch in
the middle of the day and your evening meal. And you
operate around those three fixed points of time.
Now, if you're in the middle of a fire mission and
come dinner time, your dinner waits. If it's an
extended mission, why don't you infiltrate? one
or two men out of your section of time goes back and
gets his food and comes back and eats it right there
between fire missions.
Men understand that, don't they? They understand
it and they cooperate and coordinate and live with
it. You don't have any grousing about time off or
working 40 hours a week or anything like that. They
work seven days a day around the clock. Then again,
when... Your mission's over, and you can see a lull
in the thing. You completely relax, and if they
want to go to get their meals, fine. If they don't,
fine.
You say relax and have a beer or drink. The answer to
that is, there's no way that we furnish them with
that. The American soldiers in Pride and Soul in
the little towns, if there was any beer around, he
found it.
He requisitioned it, if that's a good word. If in a
house, a blown-out house or something, he'd get in
there and find a bottle of schnapps where they'd
take it back to the section and drink it. And
it was a very informal thing,
but when time came to move, you could interrupt him
in anything, and he understood it was time to move,
and he moved. meaning one of the finest things that
my battalion ever did, and we did that back in
France, went through a farmhouse and
they found a upright piano. And one of my wire
section boys could play a piano. So they
requisitioned this piano and put it in a wire truck
up against the, the cab, covered it up with wire so I
wouldn't know anything about it. And after so long
time, every time we'd set up shop somewhere, got
all the wire in and time to do it, there was
something where this soldier would start playing
piano. And I'd happen by there and I'd see the same
damn piano and find out, I'd ask the wire chief what
goes here. And he'd say, oh, we requisitioned that
back in some old town of France. And that was a great
source of relaxation for that wire section.
They kept at the end all the way in Germany.
Frankly, I don't know what happened to it. But they
asked me if we could keep it. And I said, sure, just
as long as it doesn't become a burden to you in your
wire section. You've got to haul so many miles of
wire. And as long as you've got that wire there and
you can transport it, that's fine. And so this
piano was a great source of relaxation for my whole
headwaters, because they'd all wander in and
they'd hear the music, you know, and they'd wander
in and time off.
It was a great thing. It was a great thing. Did you
ever give anyone leave to go back to Paris or
anything like that? No. How did that work? Yes and
no.
The Army very quickly, after VE Day, set up rest
centers. They didn't do it, to my knowledge. Well,
they did, too. They did, too.
Still in combat, they had some rest centers down in
the French Riviera. They were in Cannes and Nice.
And it went over nearly somewhere on the Italian
Adriatic Sea. And every now and then, I guess the
Army and the Division got quarters. And there
again, they weren't any quarters for separate
troops. We didn't get any quarters. And until
after VE Day, then we got quarters.
The portals were all used up by the time they got to
us. That's the only excuse they had. They were all
given that. And so I followed up on that thing. And
for a share, I was telling them to shake it up. There
were too few in the portal. But once VGD happened,
well, we got quarters. And we'd get into people who
had gotten hurt first. And then the ones that had
the most combat had to work it on down to the latest
man.
Did you ever go to one of these restaurants? I'm
sorry? Did you ever go to one of these restaurants?
Yeah, I went back to England. I got to fly back to
England one time. Between transfers, and I think
it was between transfers from the 777 battalion to
the 745 battalion. That's where I remember it.
When I got the telephone, oh, I think it was
transferring from the 777 to the 745. Which one?
How much time did it give you? Well, I had five or six
nights. There
again, the light, I pulled the switch and the light
turned on for me. I didn't have any relaxation or
anything else. The whole time, I just transferred
to 745 Battalion.